The Wrong Shape


Certain of the great roads going north out of London continue far into
the country a sort of attenuated and interrupted spectre of a street,
with great gaps in the building, but preserving the line. Here will be a
group of shops, followed by a fenced field or paddock, and then a famous
public-house, and then perhaps a market garden or a nursery garden, and
then one large private house, and then another field and another inn,
and so on. If anyone walks along one of these roads he will pass a house
which will probably catch his eye, though he may not be able to explain
its attraction. It is a long, low house, running parallel with the road,
painted mostly white and pale green, with a veranda and sun-blinds, and
porches capped with those quaint sort of cupolas like wooden umbrellas
that one sees in some old-fashioned houses. In fact, it is an
old-fashioned house, very English and very suburban in the good old
wealthy Clapham sense. And yet the house has a look of having been built
chiefly for the hot weather. Looking at its white paint and sun-blinds
one thinks vaguely of pugarees and even of palm trees. I cannot trace
the feeling to its root; perhaps the place was built by an Anglo-Indian.

Anyone passing this house, I say, would be namelessly fascinated by it;
would feel that it was a place about which some story was to be told.
And he would have been right, as you shall shortly hear. For this is the
story--the story of the strange things that did really happen in it in
the Whitsuntide of the year 18--:

Anyone passing the house on the Thursday before Whit-Sunday at about
half-past four p.m. would have seen the front door open, and Father
Brown, of the small church of St. Mungo, come out smoking a large pipe
in company with a very tall French friend of his called Flambeau, who
was smoking a very small cigarette. These persons may or may not be of
interest to the reader, but the truth is that they were not the only
interesting things that were displayed when the front door of the
white-and-green house was opened. There are further peculiarities about
this house, which must be described to start with, not only that the
reader may understand this tragic tale, but also that he may realise
what it was that the opening of the door revealed.

The whole house was built upon the plan of a T, but a T with a very long
cross piece and a very short tail piece. The long cross piece was the
frontage that ran along in face of the street, with the front door
in the middle; it was two stories high, and contained nearly all
the important rooms. The short tail piece, which ran out at the back
immediately opposite the front door, was one story high, and consisted
only of two long rooms, the one leading into the other. The first of
these two rooms was the study in which the celebrated Mr. Quinton wrote
his wild Oriental poems and romances. The farther room was a glass
conservatory full of tropical blossoms of quite unique and almost
monstrous beauty, and on such afternoons as these glowing with gorgeous
sunlight. Thus when the hall door was open, many a passer-by literally
stopped to stare and gasp; for he looked down a perspective of rich
apartments to something really like a transformation scene in a fairy
play: purple clouds and golden suns and crimson stars that were at once
scorchingly vivid and yet transparent and far away.

Leonard Quinton, the poet, had himself most carefully arranged this
effect; and it is doubtful whether he so perfectly expressed his
personality in any of his poems. For he was a man who drank and bathed
in colours, who indulged his lust for colour somewhat to the neglect
of form--even of good form. This it was that had turned his genius
so wholly to eastern art and imagery; to those bewildering carpets
or blinding embroideries in which all the colours seem fallen into a
fortunate chaos, having nothing to typify or to teach. He had attempted,
not perhaps with complete artistic success, but with acknowledged
imagination and invention, to compose epics and love stories reflecting
the riot of violent and even cruel colour; tales of tropical heavens
of burning gold or blood-red copper; of eastern heroes who rode with
twelve-turbaned mitres upon elephants painted purple or peacock green;
of gigantic jewels that a hundred negroes could not carry, but which
burned with ancient and strange-hued fires.

In short (to put the matter from the more common point of view), he
dealt much in eastern heavens, rather worse than most western hells; in
eastern monarchs, whom we might possibly call maniacs; and in eastern
jewels which a Bond Street jeweller (if the hundred staggering negroes
brought them into his shop) might possibly not regard as genuine.
Quinton was a genius, if a morbid one; and even his morbidity appeared
more in his life than in his work. In temperament he was weak and
waspish, and his health had suffered heavily from oriental experiments
with opium. His wife--a handsome, hard-working, and, indeed, over-worked
woman objected to the opium, but objected much more to a live Indian
hermit in white and yellow robes, whom her husband insisted on
entertaining for months together, a Virgil to guide his spirit through
the heavens and the hells of the east.

It was out of this artistic household that Father Brown and his friend
stepped on to the door-step; and to judge from their faces, they stepped
out of it with much relief. Flambeau had known Quinton in wild student
days in Paris, and they had renewed the acquaintance for a week-end; but
apart from Flambeau’s more responsible developments of late, he did not
get on well with the poet now. Choking oneself with opium and writing
little erotic verses on vellum was not his notion of how a gentleman
should go to the devil. As the two paused on the door-step, before
taking a turn in the garden, the front garden gate was thrown open with
violence, and a young man with a billycock hat on the back of his head
tumbled up the steps in his eagerness. He was a dissipated-looking youth
with a gorgeous red necktie all awry, as if he had slept in it, and he
kept fidgeting and lashing about with one of those little jointed canes.

“I say,” he said breathlessly, “I want to see old Quinton. I must see
him. Has he gone?”

“Mr. Quinton is in, I believe,” said Father Brown, cleaning his pipe,
“but I do not know if you can see him. The doctor is with him at
present.”

The young man, who seemed not to be perfectly sober, stumbled into the
hall; and at the same moment the doctor came out of Quinton’s study,
shutting the door and beginning to put on his gloves.

“See Mr. Quinton?” said the doctor coolly. “No, I’m afraid you can’t. In
fact, you mustn’t on any account. Nobody must see him; I’ve just given
him his sleeping draught.”

“No, but look here, old chap,” said the youth in the red tie, trying
affectionately to capture the doctor by the lapels of his coat. “Look
here. I’m simply sewn up, I tell you. I--”

“It’s no good, Mr. Atkinson,” said the doctor, forcing him to fall back;
“when you can alter the effects of a drug I’ll alter my decision,” and,
settling on his hat, he stepped out into the sunlight with the other
two. He was a bull-necked, good-tempered little man with a small
moustache, inexpressibly ordinary, yet giving an impression of capacity.

The young man in the billycock, who did not seem to be gifted with any
tact in dealing with people beyond the general idea of clutching hold of
their coats, stood outside the door, as dazed as if he had been thrown
out bodily, and silently watched the other three walk away together
through the garden.

“That was a sound, spanking lie I told just now,” remarked the medical
man, laughing. “In point of fact, poor Quinton doesn’t have his sleeping
draught for nearly half an hour. But I’m not going to have him bothered
with that little beast, who only wants to borrow money that he wouldn’t
pay back if he could. He’s a dirty little scamp, though he is Mrs.
Quinton’s brother, and she’s as fine a woman as ever walked.”

“Yes,” said Father Brown. “She’s a good woman.”

“So I propose to hang about the garden till the creature has cleared
off,” went on the doctor, “and then I’ll go in to Quinton with the
medicine. Atkinson can’t get in, because I locked the door.”

“In that case, Dr. Harris,” said Flambeau, “we might as well walk round
at the back by the end of the conservatory. There’s no entrance to it
that way, but it’s worth seeing, even from the outside.”

“Yes, and I might get a squint at my patient,” laughed the doctor, “for
he prefers to lie on an ottoman right at the end of the conservatory
amid all those blood-red poinsettias; it would give me the creeps. But
what are you doing?”

Father Brown had stopped for a moment, and picked up out of the long
grass, where it had almost been wholly hidden, a queer, crooked Oriental
knife, inlaid exquisitely in coloured stones and metals.

“What is this?” asked Father Brown, regarding it with some disfavour.

“Oh, Quinton’s, I suppose,” said Dr. Harris carelessly; “he has all
sorts of Chinese knickknacks about the place. Or perhaps it belongs to
that mild Hindoo of his whom he keeps on a string.”

“What Hindoo?” asked Father Brown, still staring at the dagger in his
hand.

“Oh, some Indian conjuror,” said the doctor lightly; “a fraud, of
course.”

“You don’t believe in magic?” asked Father Brown, without looking up.

“O crickey! magic!” said the doctor.

“It’s very beautiful,” said the priest in a low, dreaming voice; “the
colours are very beautiful. But it’s the wrong shape.”

“What for?” asked Flambeau, staring.

“For anything. It’s the wrong shape in the abstract. Don’t you ever feel
that about Eastern art? The colours are intoxicatingly lovely; but the
shapes are mean and bad--deliberately mean and bad. I have seen wicked
things in a Turkey carpet.”

“Mon Dieu!” cried Flambeau, laughing.

“They are letters and symbols in a language I don’t know; but I know
they stand for evil words,” went on the priest, his voice growing lower
and lower. “The lines go wrong on purpose--like serpents doubling to
escape.”

“What the devil are you talking about?” said the doctor with a loud
laugh.

Flambeau spoke quietly to him in answer. “The Father sometimes gets this
mystic’s cloud on him,” he said; “but I give you fair warning that I
have never known him to have it except when there was some evil quite
near.”

“Oh, rats!” said the scientist.

“Why, look at it,” cried Father Brown, holding out the crooked knife at
arm’s length, as if it were some glittering snake. “Don’t you see it is
the wrong shape? Don’t you see that it has no hearty and plain purpose?
It does not point like a spear. It does not sweep like a scythe. It does
not look like a weapon. It looks like an instrument of torture.”

“Well, as you don’t seem to like it,” said the jolly Harris, “it had
better be taken back to its owner. Haven’t we come to the end of this
confounded conservatory yet? This house is the wrong shape, if you
like.”

“You don’t understand,” said Father Brown, shaking his head. “The shape
of this house is quaint--it is even laughable. But there is nothing
wrong about it.”

As they spoke they came round the curve of glass that ended the
conservatory, an uninterrupted curve, for there was neither door nor
window by which to enter at that end. The glass, however, was clear, and
the sun still bright, though beginning to set; and they could see not
only the flamboyant blossoms inside, but the frail figure of the poet
in a brown velvet coat lying languidly on the sofa, having, apparently,
fallen half asleep over a book. He was a pale, slight man, with loose,
chestnut hair and a fringe of beard that was the paradox of his face,
for the beard made him look less manly. These traits were well known
to all three of them; but even had it not been so, it may be doubted
whether they would have looked at Quinton just then. Their eyes were
riveted on another object.

Exactly in their path, immediately outside the round end of the glass
building, was standing a tall man, whose drapery fell to his feet in
faultless white, and whose bare, brown skull, face, and neck gleamed in
the setting sun like splendid bronze. He was looking through the glass
at the sleeper, and he was more motionless than a mountain.

“Who is that?” cried Father Brown, stepping back with a hissing intake
of his breath.

“Oh, it is only that Hindoo humbug,” growled Harris; “but I don’t know
what the deuce he’s doing here.”

“It looks like hypnotism,” said Flambeau, biting his black moustache.

“Why are you unmedical fellows always talking bosh about hypnotism?”
 cried the doctor. “It looks a deal more like burglary.”

“Well, we will speak to it, at any rate,” said Flambeau, who was always
for action. One long stride took him to the place where the Indian
stood. Bowing from his great height, which overtopped even the
Oriental’s, he said with placid impudence:

“Good evening, sir. Do you want anything?”

Quite slowly, like a great ship turning into a harbour, the great yellow
face turned, and looked at last over its white shoulder. They were
startled to see that its yellow eyelids were quite sealed, as in sleep.
“Thank you,” said the face in excellent English. “I want nothing.” Then,
half opening the lids, so as to show a slit of opalescent eyeball,
he repeated, “I want nothing.” Then he opened his eyes wide with a
startling stare, said, “I want nothing,” and went rustling away into the
rapidly darkening garden.

“The Christian is more modest,” muttered Father Brown; “he wants
something.”

“What on earth was he doing?” asked Flambeau, knitting his black brows
and lowering his voice.

“I should like to talk to you later,” said Father Brown.

The sunlight was still a reality, but it was the red light of evening,
and the bulk of the garden trees and bushes grew blacker and blacker
against it. They turned round the end of the conservatory, and walked in
silence down the other side to get round to the front door. As they went
they seemed to wake something, as one startles a bird, in the deeper
corner between the study and the main building; and again they saw the
white-robed fakir slide out of the shadow, and slip round towards the
front door. To their surprise, however, he had not been alone.
They found themselves abruptly pulled up and forced to banish their
bewilderment by the appearance of Mrs. Quinton, with her heavy golden
hair and square pale face, advancing on them out of the twilight. She
looked a little stern, but was entirely courteous.

“Good evening, Dr. Harris,” was all she said.

“Good evening, Mrs. Quinton,” said the little doctor heartily. “I am
just going to give your husband his sleeping draught.”

“Yes,” she said in a clear voice. “I think it is quite time.” And she
smiled at them, and went sweeping into the house.

“That woman’s over-driven,” said Father Brown; “that’s the kind of woman
that does her duty for twenty years, and then does something dreadful.”

The little doctor looked at him for the first time with an eye of
interest. “Did you ever study medicine?” he asked.

“You have to know something of the mind as well as the body,” answered
the priest; “we have to know something of the body as well as the mind.”

“Well,” said the doctor, “I think I’ll go and give Quinton his stuff.”

They had turned the corner of the front façade, and were approaching the
front doorway. As they turned into it they saw the man in the white robe
for the third time. He came so straight towards the front door that
it seemed quite incredible that he had not just come out of the study
opposite to it. Yet they knew that the study door was locked.

Father Brown and Flambeau, however, kept this weird contradiction to
themselves, and Dr. Harris was not a man to waste his thoughts on the
impossible. He permitted the omnipresent Asiatic to make his exit, and
then stepped briskly into the hall. There he found a figure which he had
already forgotten. The inane Atkinson was still hanging about, humming
and poking things with his knobby cane. The doctor’s face had a spasm of
disgust and decision, and he whispered rapidly to his companion: “I must
lock the door again, or this rat will get in. But I shall be out again
in two minutes.”

He rapidly unlocked the door and locked it again behind him, just
balking a blundering charge from the young man in the billycock. The
young man threw himself impatiently on a hall chair. Flambeau looked at
a Persian illumination on the wall; Father Brown, who seemed in a sort
of daze, dully eyed the door. In about four minutes the door was opened
again. Atkinson was quicker this time. He sprang forward, held the door
open for an instant, and called out: “Oh, I say, Quinton, I want--”

From the other end of the study came the clear voice of Quinton, in
something between a yawn and a yell of weary laughter.

“Oh, I know what you want. Take it, and leave me in peace. I’m writing a
song about peacocks.”

Before the door closed half a sovereign came flying through the
aperture; and Atkinson, stumbling forward, caught it with singular
dexterity.

“So that’s settled,” said the doctor, and, locking the door savagely, he
led the way out into the garden.

“Poor Leonard can get a little peace now,” he added to Father Brown;
“he’s locked in all by himself for an hour or two.”

“Yes,” answered the priest; “and his voice sounded jolly enough when we
left him.” Then he looked gravely round the garden, and saw the loose
figure of Atkinson standing and jingling the half-sovereign in his
pocket, and beyond, in the purple twilight, the figure of the Indian
sitting bolt upright upon a bank of grass with his face turned towards
the setting sun. Then he said abruptly: “Where is Mrs. Quinton!”

“She has gone up to her room,” said the doctor. “That is her shadow on
the blind.”

Father Brown looked up, and frowningly scrutinised a dark outline at the
gas-lit window.

“Yes,” he said, “that is her shadow,” and he walked a yard or two and
threw himself upon a garden seat.

Flambeau sat down beside him; but the doctor was one of those energetic
people who live naturally on their legs. He walked away, smoking, into
the twilight, and the two friends were left together.

“My father,” said Flambeau in French, “what is the matter with you?”

Father Brown was silent and motionless for half a minute, then he said:
“Superstition is irreligious, but there is something in the air of this
place. I think it’s that Indian--at least, partly.”

He sank into silence, and watched the distant outline of the Indian, who
still sat rigid as if in prayer. At first sight he seemed motionless,
but as Father Brown watched him he saw that the man swayed ever so
slightly with a rhythmic movement, just as the dark tree-tops swayed
ever so slightly in the wind that was creeping up the dim garden paths
and shuffling the fallen leaves a little.

The landscape was growing rapidly dark, as if for a storm, but they
could still see all the figures in their various places. Atkinson was
leaning against a tree with a listless face; Quinton’s wife was still
at her window; the doctor had gone strolling round the end of the
conservatory; they could see his cigar like a will-o’-the-wisp; and the
fakir still sat rigid and yet rocking, while the trees above him began
to rock and almost to roar. Storm was certainly coming.

“When that Indian spoke to us,” went on Brown in a conversational
undertone, “I had a sort of vision, a vision of him and all his
universe. Yet he only said the same thing three times. When first he
said ‘I want nothing,’ it meant only that he was impenetrable, that Asia
does not give itself away. Then he said again, ‘I want nothing,’ and
I knew that he meant that he was sufficient to himself, like a cosmos,
that he needed no God, neither admitted any sins. And when he said the
third time, ‘I want nothing,’ he said it with blazing eyes. And I knew
that he meant literally what he said; that nothing was his desire and
his home; that he was weary for nothing as for wine; that annihilation,
the mere destruction of everything or anything--”

Two drops of rain fell; and for some reason Flambeau started and looked
up, as if they had stung him. And the same instant the doctor down by
the end of the conservatory began running towards them, calling out
something as he ran.

As he came among them like a bombshell the restless Atkinson happened to
be taking a turn nearer to the house front; and the doctor clutched him
by the collar in a convulsive grip. “Foul play!” he cried; “what have
you been doing to him, you dog?”

The priest had sprung erect, and had the voice of steel of a soldier in
command.

“No fighting,” he cried coolly; “we are enough to hold anyone we want
to. What is the matter, doctor?”

“Things are not right with Quinton,” said the doctor, quite white. “I
could just see him through the glass, and I don’t like the way he’s
lying. It’s not as I left him, anyhow.”

“Let us go in to him,” said Father Brown shortly. “You can leave Mr.
Atkinson alone. I have had him in sight since we heard Quinton’s voice.”

“I will stop here and watch him,” said Flambeau hurriedly. “You go in
and see.”

The doctor and the priest flew to the study door, unlocked it, and fell
into the room. In doing so they nearly fell over the large mahogany
table in the centre at which the poet usually wrote; for the place was
lit only by a small fire kept for the invalid. In the middle of this
table lay a single sheet of paper, evidently left there on purpose. The
doctor snatched it up, glanced at it, handed it to Father Brown, and
crying, “Good God, look at that!” plunged toward the glass room beyond,
where the terrible tropic flowers still seemed to keep a crimson memory
of the sunset.

Father Brown read the words three times before he put down the paper.
The words were: “I die by my own hand; yet I die murdered!” They were
in the quite inimitable, not to say illegible, handwriting of Leonard
Quinton.

Then Father Brown, still keeping the paper in his hand, strode towards
the conservatory, only to meet his medical friend coming back with a
face of assurance and collapse. “He’s done it,” said Harris.

They went together through the gorgeous unnatural beauty of cactus
and azalea and found Leonard Quinton, poet and romancer, with his head
hanging downward off his ottoman and his red curls sweeping the ground.
Into his left side was thrust the queer dagger that they had picked up
in the garden, and his limp hand still rested on the hilt.

Outside the storm had come at one stride, like the night in Coleridge,
and garden and glass roof were darkened with driving rain. Father Brown
seemed to be studying the paper more than the corpse; he held it close
to his eyes; and seemed trying to read it in the twilight. Then he held
it up against the faint light, and, as he did so, lightning stared at
them for an instant so white that the paper looked black against it.

Darkness full of thunder followed, and after the thunder Father Brown’s
voice said out of the dark: “Doctor, this paper is the wrong shape.”

“What do you mean?” asked Doctor Harris, with a frowning stare.

“It isn’t square,” answered Brown. “It has a sort of edge snipped off at
the corner. What does it mean?”

“How the deuce should I know?” growled the doctor. “Shall we move this
poor chap, do you think? He’s quite dead.”

“No,” answered the priest; “we must leave him as he lies and send for
the police.” But he was still scrutinising the paper.

As they went back through the study he stopped by the table and picked
up a small pair of nail scissors. “Ah,” he said, with a sort of relief,
“this is what he did it with. But yet--” And he knitted his brows.

“Oh, stop fooling with that scrap of paper,” said the doctor
emphatically. “It was a fad of his. He had hundreds of them. He cut all
his paper like that,” as he pointed to a stack of sermon paper still
unused on another and smaller table. Father Brown went up to it and held
up a sheet. It was the same irregular shape.

“Quite so,” he said. “And here I see the corners that were snipped off.”
 And to the indignation of his colleague he began to count them.

“That’s all right,” he said, with an apologetic smile. “Twenty-three
sheets cut and twenty-two corners cut off them. And as I see you are
impatient we will rejoin the others.”

“Who is to tell his wife?” asked Dr. Harris. “Will you go and tell her
now, while I send a servant for the police?”

“As you will,” said Father Brown indifferently. And he went out to the
hall door.

Here also he found a drama, though of a more grotesque sort. It showed
nothing less than his big friend Flambeau in an attitude to which he
had long been unaccustomed, while upon the pathway at the bottom of the
steps was sprawling with his boots in the air the amiable Atkinson, his
billycock hat and walking cane sent flying in opposite directions along
the path. Atkinson had at length wearied of Flambeau’s almost paternal
custody, and had endeavoured to knock him down, which was by no means a
smooth game to play with the Roi des Apaches, even after that monarch’s
abdication.

Flambeau was about to leap upon his enemy and secure him once more, when
the priest patted him easily on the shoulder.

“Make it up with Mr. Atkinson, my friend,” he said. “Beg a mutual pardon
and say ‘Good night.’ We need not detain him any longer.” Then, as
Atkinson rose somewhat doubtfully and gathered his hat and stick and
went towards the garden gate, Father Brown said in a more serious voice:
“Where is that Indian?”

They all three (for the doctor had joined them) turned involuntarily
towards the dim grassy bank amid the tossing trees purple with twilight,
where they had last seen the brown man swaying in his strange prayers.
The Indian was gone.

“Confound him,” cried the doctor, stamping furiously. “Now I know that
it was that nigger that did it.”

“I thought you didn’t believe in magic,” said Father Brown quietly.

“No more I did,” said the doctor, rolling his eyes. “I only know that
I loathed that yellow devil when I thought he was a sham wizard. And I
shall loathe him more if I come to think he was a real one.”

“Well, his having escaped is nothing,” said Flambeau. “For we could
have proved nothing and done nothing against him. One hardly goes to
the parish constable with a story of suicide imposed by witchcraft or
auto-suggestion.”

Meanwhile Father Brown had made his way into the house, and now went to
break the news to the wife of the dead man.

When he came out again he looked a little pale and tragic, but what
passed between them in that interview was never known, even when all was
known.

Flambeau, who was talking quietly with the doctor, was surprised to see
his friend reappear so soon at his elbow; but Brown took no notice, and
merely drew the doctor apart. “You have sent for the police, haven’t
you?” he asked.

“Yes,” answered Harris. “They ought to be here in ten minutes.”

“Will you do me a favour?” said the priest quietly. “The truth is, I
make a collection of these curious stories, which often contain, as in
the case of our Hindoo friend, elements which can hardly be put into a
police report. Now, I want you to write out a report of this case for
my private use. Yours is a clever trade,” he said, looking the doctor
gravely and steadily in the face. “I sometimes think that you know some
details of this matter which you have not thought fit to mention. Mine
is a confidential trade like yours, and I will treat anything you write
for me in strict confidence. But write the whole.”

The doctor, who had been listening thoughtfully with his head a little
on one side, looked the priest in the face for an instant, and said:
“All right,” and went into the study, closing the door behind him.

“Flambeau,” said Father Brown, “there is a long seat there under the
veranda, where we can smoke out of the rain. You are my only friend in
the world, and I want to talk to you. Or, perhaps, be silent with you.”

They established themselves comfortably in the veranda seat; Father
Brown, against his common habit, accepted a good cigar and smoked it
steadily in silence, while the rain shrieked and rattled on the roof of
the veranda.

“My friend,” he said at length, “this is a very queer case. A very queer
case.”

“I should think it was,” said Flambeau, with something like a shudder.

“You call it queer, and I call it queer,” said the other, “and yet
we mean quite opposite things. The modern mind always mixes up two
different ideas: mystery in the sense of what is marvellous, and mystery
in the sense of what is complicated. That is half its difficulty about
miracles. A miracle is startling; but it is simple. It is simple because
it is a miracle. It is power coming directly from God (or the devil)
instead of indirectly through nature or human wills. Now, you mean that
this business is marvellous because it is miraculous, because it is
witchcraft worked by a wicked Indian. Understand, I do not say that
it was not spiritual or diabolic. Heaven and hell only know by what
surrounding influences strange sins come into the lives of men. But for
the present my point is this: If it was pure magic, as you think,
then it is marvellous; but it is not mysterious--that is, it is not
complicated. The quality of a miracle is mysterious, but its manner
is simple. Now, the manner of this business has been the reverse of
simple.”

The storm that had slackened for a little seemed to be swelling again,
and there came heavy movements as of faint thunder. Father Brown let
fall the ash of his cigar and went on:

“There has been in this incident,” he said, “a twisted, ugly, complex
quality that does not belong to the straight bolts either of heaven
or hell. As one knows the crooked track of a snail, I know the crooked
track of a man.”

The white lightning opened its enormous eye in one wink, the sky shut up
again, and the priest went on:

“Of all these crooked things, the crookedest was the shape of that piece
of paper. It was crookeder than the dagger that killed him.”

“You mean the paper on which Quinton confessed his suicide,” said
Flambeau.

“I mean the paper on which Quinton wrote, ‘I die by my own hand,’”
 answered Father Brown. “The shape of that paper, my friend, was the
wrong shape; the wrong shape, if ever I have seen it in this wicked
world.”

“It only had a corner snipped off,” said Flambeau, “and I understand
that all Quinton’s paper was cut that way.”

“It was a very odd way,” said the other, “and a very bad way, to my
taste and fancy. Look here, Flambeau, this Quinton--God receive his
soul!--was perhaps a bit of a cur in some ways, but he really was an
artist, with the pencil as well as the pen. His handwriting, though hard
to read, was bold and beautiful. I can’t prove what I say; I can’t prove
anything. But I tell you with the full force of conviction that he could
never have cut that mean little piece off a sheet of paper. If he had
wanted to cut down paper for some purpose of fitting in, or binding
up, or what not, he would have made quite a different slash with the
scissors. Do you remember the shape? It was a mean shape. It was a wrong
shape. Like this. Don’t you remember?”

And he waved his burning cigar before him in the darkness, making
irregular squares so rapidly that Flambeau really seemed to see them as
fiery hieroglyphics upon the darkness--hieroglyphics such as his friend
had spoken of, which are undecipherable, yet can have no good meaning.

“But,” said Flambeau, as the priest put his cigar in his mouth again
and leaned back, staring at the roof, “suppose somebody else did use the
scissors. Why should somebody else, cutting pieces off his sermon paper,
make Quinton commit suicide?”

Father Brown was still leaning back and staring at the roof, but he took
his cigar out of his mouth and said: “Quinton never did commit suicide.”

Flambeau stared at him. “Why, confound it all,” he cried, “then why did
he confess to suicide?”

The priest leant forward again, settled his elbows on his knees, looked
at the ground, and said, in a low, distinct voice: “He never did confess
to suicide.”

Flambeau laid his cigar down. “You mean,” he said, “that the writing was
forged?”

“No,” said Father Brown. “Quinton wrote it all right.”

“Well, there you are,” said the aggravated Flambeau; “Quinton wrote, ‘I
die by my own hand,’ with his own hand on a plain piece of paper.”

“Of the wrong shape,” said the priest calmly.

“Oh, the shape be damned!” cried Flambeau. “What has the shape to do
with it?”

“There were twenty-three snipped papers,” resumed Brown unmoved, “and
only twenty-two pieces snipped off. Therefore one of the pieces had
been destroyed, probably that from the written paper. Does that suggest
anything to you?”

A light dawned on Flambeau’s face, and he said: “There was something
else written by Quinton, some other words. ‘They will tell you I die by
my own hand,’ or ‘Do not believe that--’”

“Hotter, as the children say,” said his friend. “But the piece was
hardly half an inch across; there was no room for one word, let alone
five. Can you think of anything hardly bigger than a comma which the man
with hell in his heart had to tear away as a testimony against him?”

“I can think of nothing,” said Flambeau at last.

“What about quotation marks?” said the priest, and flung his cigar far
into the darkness like a shooting star.

All words had left the other man’s mouth, and Father Brown said, like
one going back to fundamentals:

“Leonard Quinton was a romancer, and was writing an Oriental romance
about wizardry and hypnotism. He--”

At this moment the door opened briskly behind them, and the doctor came
out with his hat on. He put a long envelope into the priest’s hands.

“That’s the document you wanted,” he said, “and I must be getting home.
Good night.”

“Good night,” said Father Brown, as the doctor walked briskly to the
gate. He had left the front door open, so that a shaft of gaslight fell
upon them. In the light of this Brown opened the envelope and read the
following words:



    DEAR FATHER BROWN,--Vicisti Galilee. Otherwise, damn your
    eyes, which are very penetrating ones. Can it be possible that
    there is something in all that stuff of yours after all?


    I am a man who has ever since boyhood believed in Nature and
    in all natural functions and instincts, whether men called them
    moral or immoral. Long before I became a doctor, when I was a
    schoolboy keeping mice and spiders, I believed that to be a good
    animal is the best thing in the world. But just now I am shaken;
    I have believed in Nature; but it seems as if Nature could betray
    a man. Can there be anything in your bosh? I am really getting
    morbid.


    I loved Quinton’s wife. What was there wrong in that? Nature
    told me to, and it’s love that makes the world go round. I also
    thought quite sincerely that she would be happier with a clean
    animal like me than with that tormenting little lunatic. What was
    there wrong in that? I was only facing facts, like a man of
    science. She would have been happier.


    According to my own creed I was quite free to kill Quinton,
    which was the best thing for everybody, even himself. But as a
    healthy animal I had no notion of killing myself. I resolved,
    therefore, that I would never do it until I saw a chance that
    would leave me scot free. I saw that chance this morning.


    I have been three times, all told, into Quinton’s study today.
    The first time I went in he would talk about nothing but the weird
    tale, called “The Cure of a Saint,” which he was writing, which
    was all about how some Indian hermit made an English colonel kill
    himself by thinking about him. He showed me the last sheets, and
    even read me the last paragraph, which was something like this:
    “The conqueror of the Punjab, a mere yellow skeleton, but still
    gigantic, managed to lift himself on his elbow and gasp in his
    nephew’s ear: ‘I die by my own hand, yet I die murdered!’” It so
    happened by one chance out of a hundred, that those last words
    were written at the top of a new sheet of paper. I left the room,
    and went out into the garden intoxicated with a frightful
    opportunity.


    We walked round the house; and two more things happened in my
    favour. You suspected an Indian, and you found a dagger which the
    Indian might most probably use. Taking the opportunity to stuff
    it in my pocket I went back to Quinton’s study, locked the door,
    and gave him his sleeping draught. He was against answering
    Atkinson at all, but I urged him to call out and quiet the fellow,
    because I wanted a clear proof that Quinton was alive when I left
    the room for the second time. Quinton lay down in the conservatory,
    and I came through the study. I am a quick man with my hands, and
    in a minute and a half I had done what I wanted to do. I had
    emptied all the first part of Quinton’s romance into the fireplace,
    where it burnt to ashes. Then I saw that the quotation marks
    wouldn’t do, so I snipped them off, and to make it seem likelier,
    snipped the whole quire to match. Then I came out with the
    knowledge that Quinton’s confession of suicide lay on the front
    table, while Quinton lay alive but asleep in the conservatory
    beyond.


    The last act was a desperate one; you can guess it: I pretended
    to have seen Quinton dead and rushed to his room. I delayed you
    with the paper, and, being a quick man with my hands, killed
    Quinton while you were looking at his confession of suicide. He
    was half-asleep, being drugged, and I put his own hand on the
    knife and drove it into his body. The knife was of so queer a
    shape that no one but an operator could have calculated the angle
    that would reach his heart. I wonder if you noticed this.


    When I had done it, the extraordinary thing happened. Nature
    deserted me. I felt ill. I felt just as if I had done something
    wrong. I think my brain is breaking up; I feel some sort of
    desperate pleasure in thinking I have told the thing to somebody;
    that I shall not have to be alone with it if I marry and have
    children. What is the matter with me?... Madness... or can one
    have remorse, just as if one were in Byron’s poems! I cannot
    write any more.

                   James Erskine Harris.


Father Brown carefully folded up the letter, and put it in his breast
pocket just as there came a loud peal at the gate bell, and the wet
waterproofs of several policemen gleamed in the road outside.




The Sins of Prince Saradine


When Flambeau took his month’s holiday from his office in Westminster
he took it in a small sailing-boat, so small that it passed much of its
time as a rowing-boat. He took it, moreover, in little rivers in the
Eastern counties, rivers so small that the boat looked like a magic
boat, sailing on land through meadows and cornfields. The vessel was
just comfortable for two people; there was room only for necessities,
and Flambeau had stocked it with such things as his special philosophy
considered necessary. They reduced themselves, apparently, to four
essentials: tins of salmon, if he should want to eat; loaded revolvers,
if he should want to fight; a bottle of brandy, presumably in case he
should faint; and a priest, presumably in case he should die. With this
light luggage he crawled down the little Norfolk rivers, intending to
reach the Broads at last, but meanwhile delighting in the overhanging
gardens and meadows, the mirrored mansions or villages, lingering to
fish in the pools and corners, and in some sense hugging the shore.

Like a true philosopher, Flambeau had no aim in his holiday; but, like a
true philosopher, he had an excuse. He had a sort of half purpose, which
he took just so seriously that its success would crown the holiday, but
just so lightly that its failure would not spoil it. Years ago, when he
had been a king of thieves and the most famous figure in Paris, he had
often received wild communications of approval, denunciation, or even
love; but one had, somehow, stuck in his memory. It consisted simply of
a visiting-card, in an envelope with an English postmark. On the back of
the card was written in French and in green ink: “If you ever retire and
become respectable, come and see me. I want to meet you, for I have met
all the other great men of my time. That trick of yours of getting one
detective to arrest the other was the most splendid scene in French
history.” On the front of the card was engraved in the formal fashion,
“Prince Saradine, Reed House, Reed Island, Norfolk.”

He had not troubled much about the prince then, beyond ascertaining that
he had been a brilliant and fashionable figure in southern Italy. In his
youth, it was said, he had eloped with a married woman of high rank; the
escapade was scarcely startling in his social world, but it had clung to
men’s minds because of an additional tragedy: the alleged suicide of the
insulted husband, who appeared to have flung himself over a precipice in
Sicily. The prince then lived in Vienna for a time, but his more recent
years seemed to have been passed in perpetual and restless travel. But
when Flambeau, like the prince himself, had left European celebrity
and settled in England, it occurred to him that he might pay a surprise
visit to this eminent exile in the Norfolk Broads. Whether he should
find the place he had no idea; and, indeed, it was sufficiently small
and forgotten. But, as things fell out, he found it much sooner than he
expected.

They had moored their boat one night under a bank veiled in high grasses
and short pollarded trees. Sleep, after heavy sculling, had come to them
early, and by a corresponding accident they awoke before it was light.
To speak more strictly, they awoke before it was daylight; for a large
lemon moon was only just setting in the forest of high grass above their
heads, and the sky was of a vivid violet-blue, nocturnal but bright.
Both men had simultaneously a reminiscence of childhood, of the elfin
and adventurous time when tall weeds close over us like woods. Standing
up thus against the large low moon, the daisies really seemed to
be giant daisies, the dandelions to be giant dandelions. Somehow it
reminded them of the dado of a nursery wall-paper. The drop of the
river-bed sufficed to sink them under the roots of all shrubs and
flowers and make them gaze upwards at the grass. “By Jove!” said
Flambeau, “it’s like being in fairyland.”

Father Brown sat bolt upright in the boat and crossed himself. His
movement was so abrupt that his friend asked him, with a mild stare,
what was the matter.

“The people who wrote the mediaeval ballads,” answered the priest, “knew
more about fairies than you do. It isn’t only nice things that happen in
fairyland.”

“Oh, bosh!” said Flambeau. “Only nice things could happen under such an
innocent moon. I am for pushing on now and seeing what does really come.
We may die and rot before we ever see again such a moon or such a mood.”

“All right,” said Father Brown. “I never said it was always wrong to
enter fairyland. I only said it was always dangerous.”

They pushed slowly up the brightening river; the glowing violet of the
sky and the pale gold of the moon grew fainter and fainter, and faded
into that vast colourless cosmos that precedes the colours of the dawn.
When the first faint stripes of red and gold and grey split the horizon
from end to end they were broken by the black bulk of a town or village
which sat on the river just ahead of them. It was already an easy
twilight, in which all things were visible, when they came under the
hanging roofs and bridges of this riverside hamlet. The houses, with
their long, low, stooping roofs, seemed to come down to drink at the
river, like huge grey and red cattle. The broadening and whitening
dawn had already turned to working daylight before they saw any living
creature on the wharves and bridges of that silent town. Eventually they
saw a very placid and prosperous man in his shirt sleeves, with a face
as round as the recently sunken moon, and rays of red whisker around the
low arc of it, who was leaning on a post above the sluggish tide. By
an impulse not to be analysed, Flambeau rose to his full height in the
swaying boat and shouted at the man to ask if he knew Reed Island or
Reed House. The prosperous man’s smile grew slightly more expansive,
and he simply pointed up the river towards the next bend of it. Flambeau
went ahead without further speech.

The boat took many such grassy corners and followed many such reedy and
silent reaches of river; but before the search had become monotonous
they had swung round a specially sharp angle and come into the silence
of a sort of pool or lake, the sight of which instinctively arrested
them. For in the middle of this wider piece of water, fringed on every
side with rushes, lay a long, low islet, along which ran a long, low
house or bungalow built of bamboo or some kind of tough tropic cane.
The upstanding rods of bamboo which made the walls were pale yellow, the
sloping rods that made the roof were of darker red or brown, otherwise
the long house was a thing of repetition and monotony. The early morning
breeze rustled the reeds round the island and sang in the strange ribbed
house as in a giant pan-pipe.

“By George!” cried Flambeau; “here is the place, after all! Here is Reed
Island, if ever there was one. Here is Reed House, if it is anywhere. I
believe that fat man with whiskers was a fairy.”

“Perhaps,” remarked Father Brown impartially. “If he was, he was a bad
fairy.”

But even as he spoke the impetuous Flambeau had run his boat ashore in
the rattling reeds, and they stood in the long, quaint islet beside the
odd and silent house.

The house stood with its back, as it were, to the river and the only
landing-stage; the main entrance was on the other side, and looked down
the long island garden. The visitors approached it, therefore, by a
small path running round nearly three sides of the house, close under
the low eaves. Through three different windows on three different sides
they looked in on the same long, well-lit room, panelled in light wood,
with a large number of looking-glasses, and laid out as for an elegant
lunch. The front door, when they came round to it at last, was flanked
by two turquoise-blue flower pots. It was opened by a butler of the
drearier type--long, lean, grey and listless--who murmured that Prince
Saradine was from home at present, but was expected hourly; the house
being kept ready for him and his guests. The exhibition of the card with
the scrawl of green ink awoke a flicker of life in the parchment face of
the depressed retainer, and it was with a certain shaky courtesy that
he suggested that the strangers should remain. “His Highness may be here
any minute,” he said, “and would be distressed to have just missed any
gentleman he had invited. We have orders always to keep a little cold
lunch for him and his friends, and I am sure he would wish it to be
offered.”

Moved with curiosity to this minor adventure, Flambeau assented
gracefully, and followed the old man, who ushered him ceremoniously into
the long, lightly panelled room. There was nothing very notable about
it, except the rather unusual alternation of many long, low windows with
many long, low oblongs of looking-glass, which gave a singular air
of lightness and unsubstantialness to the place. It was somehow like
lunching out of doors. One or two pictures of a quiet kind hung in the
corners, one a large grey photograph of a very young man in uniform,
another a red chalk sketch of two long-haired boys. Asked by Flambeau
whether the soldierly person was the prince, the butler answered shortly
in the negative; it was the prince’s younger brother, Captain Stephen
Saradine, he said. And with that the old man seemed to dry up suddenly
and lose all taste for conversation.

After lunch had tailed off with exquisite coffee and liqueurs,
the guests were introduced to the garden, the library, and the
housekeeper--a dark, handsome lady, of no little majesty, and rather
like a plutonic Madonna. It appeared that she and the butler were
the only survivors of the prince’s original foreign menage the other
servants now in the house being new and collected in Norfolk by the
housekeeper. This latter lady went by the name of Mrs. Anthony, but
she spoke with a slight Italian accent, and Flambeau did not doubt that
Anthony was a Norfolk version of some more Latin name. Mr. Paul,
the butler, also had a faintly foreign air, but he was in tongue and
training English, as are many of the most polished men-servants of the
cosmopolitan nobility.

Pretty and unique as it was, the place had about it a curious luminous
sadness. Hours passed in it like days. The long, well-windowed rooms
were full of daylight, but it seemed a dead daylight. And through all
other incidental noises, the sound of talk, the clink of glasses, or the
passing feet of servants, they could hear on all sides of the house the
melancholy noise of the river.

“We have taken a wrong turning, and come to a wrong place,” said Father
Brown, looking out of the window at the grey-green sedges and the silver
flood. “Never mind; one can sometimes do good by being the right person
in the wrong place.”

Father Brown, though commonly a silent, was an oddly sympathetic little
man, and in those few but endless hours he unconsciously sank deeper
into the secrets of Reed House than his professional friend. He had that
knack of friendly silence which is so essential to gossip; and saying
scarcely a word, he probably obtained from his new acquaintances all
that in any case they would have told. The butler indeed was naturally
uncommunicative. He betrayed a sullen and almost animal affection
for his master; who, he said, had been very badly treated. The chief
offender seemed to be his highness’s brother, whose name alone would
lengthen the old man’s lantern jaws and pucker his parrot nose into a
sneer. Captain Stephen was a ne’er-do-well, apparently, and had drained
his benevolent brother of hundreds and thousands; forced him to fly from
fashionable life and live quietly in this retreat. That was all Paul,
the butler, would say, and Paul was obviously a partisan.

The Italian housekeeper was somewhat more communicative, being, as Brown
fancied, somewhat less content. Her tone about her master was faintly
acid; though not without a certain awe. Flambeau and his friend were
standing in the room of the looking-glasses examining the red sketch
of the two boys, when the housekeeper swept in swiftly on some domestic
errand. It was a peculiarity of this glittering, glass-panelled place
that anyone entering was reflected in four or five mirrors at once; and
Father Brown, without turning round, stopped in the middle of a sentence
of family criticism. But Flambeau, who had his face close up to the
picture, was already saying in a loud voice, “The brothers Saradine, I
suppose. They both look innocent enough. It would be hard to say which
is the good brother and which the bad.” Then, realising the lady’s
presence, he turned the conversation with some triviality, and strolled
out into the garden. But Father Brown still gazed steadily at the red
crayon sketch; and Mrs. Anthony still gazed steadily at Father Brown.

She had large and tragic brown eyes, and her olive face glowed darkly
with a curious and painful wonder--as of one doubtful of a stranger’s
identity or purpose. Whether the little priest’s coat and creed touched
some southern memories of confession, or whether she fancied he knew
more than he did, she said to him in a low voice as to a fellow plotter,
“He is right enough in one way, your friend. He says it would be hard
to pick out the good and bad brothers. Oh, it would be hard, it would be
mighty hard, to pick out the good one.”

“I don’t understand you,” said Father Brown, and began to move away.

The woman took a step nearer to him, with thunderous brows and a sort of
savage stoop, like a bull lowering his horns.

“There isn’t a good one,” she hissed. “There was badness enough in the
captain taking all that money, but I don’t think there was much goodness
in the prince giving it. The captain’s not the only one with something
against him.”

A light dawned on the cleric’s averted face, and his mouth formed
silently the word “blackmail.” Even as he did so the woman turned an
abrupt white face over her shoulder and almost fell. The door had opened
soundlessly and the pale Paul stood like a ghost in the doorway. By
the weird trick of the reflecting walls, it seemed as if five Pauls had
entered by five doors simultaneously.

“His Highness,” he said, “has just arrived.”

In the same flash the figure of a man had passed outside the first
window, crossing the sunlit pane like a lighted stage. An instant
later he passed at the second window and the many mirrors repainted in
successive frames the same eagle profile and marching figure. He was
erect and alert, but his hair was white and his complexion of an odd
ivory yellow. He had that short, curved Roman nose which generally
goes with long, lean cheeks and chin, but these were partly masked by
moustache and imperial. The moustache was much darker than the beard,
giving an effect slightly theatrical, and he was dressed up to the same
dashing part, having a white top hat, an orchid in his coat, a yellow
waistcoat and yellow gloves which he flapped and swung as he walked.
When he came round to the front door they heard the stiff Paul open it,
and heard the new arrival say cheerfully, “Well, you see I have come.”
 The stiff Mr. Paul bowed and answered in his inaudible manner; for a
few minutes their conversation could not be heard. Then the butler said,
“Everything is at your disposal;” and the glove-flapping Prince Saradine
came gaily into the room to greet them. They beheld once more that
spectral scene--five princes entering a room with five doors.

The prince put the white hat and yellow gloves on the table and offered
his hand quite cordially.

“Delighted to see you here, Mr. Flambeau,” he said. “Knowing you very
well by reputation, if that’s not an indiscreet remark.”

“Not at all,” answered Flambeau, laughing. “I am not sensitive. Very few
reputations are gained by unsullied virtue.”

The prince flashed a sharp look at him to see if the retort had any
personal point; then he laughed also and offered chairs to everyone,
including himself.

“Pleasant little place, this, I think,” he said with a detached air.
“Not much to do, I fear; but the fishing is really good.”

The priest, who was staring at him with the grave stare of a baby, was
haunted by some fancy that escaped definition. He looked at the grey,
carefully curled hair, yellow white visage, and slim, somewhat foppish
figure. These were not unnatural, though perhaps a shade prononcé, like
the outfit of a figure behind the footlights. The nameless interest
lay in something else, in the very framework of the face; Brown was
tormented with a half memory of having seen it somewhere before. The
man looked like some old friend of his dressed up. Then he suddenly
remembered the mirrors, and put his fancy down to some psychological
effect of that multiplication of human masks.

Prince Saradine distributed his social attentions between his guests
with great gaiety and tact. Finding the detective of a sporting turn and
eager to employ his holiday, he guided Flambeau and Flambeau’s boat down
to the best fishing spot in the stream, and was back in his own canoe
in twenty minutes to join Father Brown in the library and plunge equally
politely into the priest’s more philosophic pleasures. He seemed to know
a great deal both about the fishing and the books, though of these not
the most edifying; he spoke five or six languages, though chiefly the
slang of each. He had evidently lived in varied cities and very motley
societies, for some of his cheerfullest stories were about gambling
hells and opium dens, Australian bushrangers or Italian brigands. Father
Brown knew that the once-celebrated Saradine had spent his last few
years in almost ceaseless travel, but he had not guessed that the
travels were so disreputable or so amusing.

Indeed, with all his dignity of a man of the world, Prince Saradine
radiated to such sensitive observers as the priest, a certain atmosphere
of the restless and even the unreliable. His face was fastidious, but
his eye was wild; he had little nervous tricks, like a man shaken by
drink or drugs, and he neither had, nor professed to have, his hand
on the helm of household affairs. All these were left to the two old
servants, especially to the butler, who was plainly the central pillar
of the house. Mr. Paul, indeed, was not so much a butler as a sort of
steward or, even, chamberlain; he dined privately, but with almost
as much pomp as his master; he was feared by all the servants; and he
consulted with the prince decorously, but somewhat unbendingly--rather
as if he were the prince’s solicitor. The sombre housekeeper was a mere
shadow in comparison; indeed, she seemed to efface herself and wait only
on the butler, and Brown heard no more of those volcanic whispers which
had half told him of the younger brother who blackmailed the elder.
Whether the prince was really being thus bled by the absent captain,
he could not be certain, but there was something insecure and secretive
about Saradine that made the tale by no means incredible.

When they went once more into the long hall with the windows and the
mirrors, yellow evening was dropping over the waters and the willowy
banks; and a bittern sounded in the distance like an elf upon his
dwarfish drum. The same singular sentiment of some sad and evil
fairyland crossed the priest’s mind again like a little grey cloud. “I
wish Flambeau were back,” he muttered.

“Do you believe in doom?” asked the restless Prince Saradine suddenly.

“No,” answered his guest. “I believe in Doomsday.”

The prince turned from the window and stared at him in a singular
manner, his face in shadow against the sunset. “What do you mean?” he
asked.

“I mean that we here are on the wrong side of the tapestry,” answered
Father Brown. “The things that happen here do not seem to mean anything;
they mean something somewhere else. Somewhere else retribution will come
on the real offender. Here it often seems to fall on the wrong person.”

The prince made an inexplicable noise like an animal; in his shadowed
face the eyes were shining queerly. A new and shrewd thought exploded
silently in the other’s mind. Was there another meaning in Saradine’s
blend of brilliancy and abruptness? Was the prince--Was he perfectly
sane? He was repeating, “The wrong person--the wrong person,” many more
times than was natural in a social exclamation.

Then Father Brown awoke tardily to a second truth. In the mirrors before
him he could see the silent door standing open, and the silent Mr. Paul
standing in it, with his usual pallid impassiveness.

“I thought it better to announce at once,” he said, with the same stiff
respectfulness as of an old family lawyer, “a boat rowed by six men
has come to the landing-stage, and there’s a gentleman sitting in the
stern.”

“A boat!” repeated the prince; “a gentleman?” and he rose to his feet.

There was a startled silence punctuated only by the odd noise of the
bird in the sedge; and then, before anyone could speak again, a new
face and figure passed in profile round the three sunlit windows, as
the prince had passed an hour or two before. But except for the accident
that both outlines were aquiline, they had little in common. Instead
of the new white topper of Saradine, was a black one of antiquated or
foreign shape; under it was a young and very solemn face, clean shaven,
blue about its resolute chin, and carrying a faint suggestion of the
young Napoleon. The association was assisted by something old and odd
about the whole get-up, as of a man who had never troubled to change
the fashions of his fathers. He had a shabby blue frock coat, a red,
soldierly looking waistcoat, and a kind of coarse white trousers common
among the early Victorians, but strangely incongruous today. From all
this old clothes-shop his olive face stood out strangely young and
monstrously sincere.

“The deuce!” said Prince Saradine, and clapping on his white hat he went
to the front door himself, flinging it open on the sunset garden.

By that time the new-comer and his followers were drawn up on the lawn
like a small stage army. The six boatmen had pulled the boat well up on
shore, and were guarding it almost menacingly, holding their oars erect
like spears. They were swarthy men, and some of them wore earrings. But
one of them stood forward beside the olive-faced young man in the red
waistcoat, and carried a large black case of unfamiliar form.

“Your name,” said the young man, “is Saradine?”

Saradine assented rather negligently.

The new-comer had dull, dog-like brown eyes, as different as possible
from the restless and glittering grey eyes of the prince. But once
again Father Brown was tortured with a sense of having seen somewhere a
replica of the face; and once again he remembered the repetitions of
the glass-panelled room, and put down the coincidence to that. “Confound
this crystal palace!” he muttered. “One sees everything too many times.
It’s like a dream.”

“If you are Prince Saradine,” said the young man, “I may tell you that
my name is Antonelli.”

“Antonelli,” repeated the prince languidly. “Somehow I remember the
name.”

“Permit me to present myself,” said the young Italian.

With his left hand he politely took off his old-fashioned top-hat; with
his right he caught Prince Saradine so ringing a crack across the
face that the white top hat rolled down the steps and one of the blue
flower-pots rocked upon its pedestal.

The prince, whatever he was, was evidently not a coward; he sprang at
his enemy’s throat and almost bore him backwards to the grass. But his
enemy extricated himself with a singularly inappropriate air of hurried
politeness.

“That is all right,” he said, panting and in halting English. “I have
insulted. I will give satisfaction. Marco, open the case.”

The man beside him with the earrings and the big black case proceeded
to unlock it. He took out of it two long Italian rapiers, with splendid
steel hilts and blades, which he planted point downwards in the lawn.
The strange young man standing facing the entrance with his yellow and
vindictive face, the two swords standing up in the turf like two crosses
in a cemetery, and the line of the ranked towers behind, gave it all an
odd appearance of being some barbaric court of justice. But everything
else was unchanged, so sudden had been the interruption. The sunset gold
still glowed on the lawn, and the bittern still boomed as announcing
some small but dreadful destiny.

“Prince Saradine,” said the man called Antonelli, “when I was an infant
in the cradle you killed my father and stole my mother; my father was
the more fortunate. You did not kill him fairly, as I am going to kill
you. You and my wicked mother took him driving to a lonely pass in
Sicily, flung him down a cliff, and went on your way. I could imitate
you if I chose, but imitating you is too vile. I have followed you all
over the world, and you have always fled from me. But this is the end
of the world--and of you. I have you now, and I give you the chance you
never gave my father. Choose one of those swords.”

Prince Saradine, with contracted brows, seemed to hesitate a moment,
but his ears were still singing with the blow, and he sprang forward
and snatched at one of the hilts. Father Brown had also sprung forward,
striving to compose the dispute; but he soon found his personal presence
made matters worse. Saradine was a French freemason and a fierce
atheist, and a priest moved him by the law of contraries. And for the
other man neither priest nor layman moved him at all. This young man
with the Bonaparte face and the brown eyes was something far sterner
than a puritan--a pagan. He was a simple slayer from the morning of the
earth; a man of the stone age--a man of stone.

One hope remained, the summoning of the household; and Father Brown ran
back into the house. He found, however, that all the under servants
had been given a holiday ashore by the autocrat Paul, and that only the
sombre Mrs. Anthony moved uneasily about the long rooms. But the moment
she turned a ghastly face upon him, he resolved one of the riddles of
the house of mirrors. The heavy brown eyes of Antonelli were the heavy
brown eyes of Mrs. Anthony; and in a flash he saw half the story.

“Your son is outside,” he said without wasting words; “either he or the
prince will be killed. Where is Mr. Paul?”

“He is at the landing-stage,” said the woman faintly. “He is--he
is--signalling for help.”

“Mrs. Anthony,” said Father Brown seriously, “there is no time for
nonsense. My friend has his boat down the river fishing. Your son’s boat
is guarded by your son’s men. There is only this one canoe; what is Mr.
Paul doing with it?”

“Santa Maria! I do not know,” she said; and swooned all her length on
the matted floor.

Father Brown lifted her to a sofa, flung a pot of water over her,
shouted for help, and then rushed down to the landing-stage of the
little island. But the canoe was already in mid-stream, and old Paul
was pulling and pushing it up the river with an energy incredible at his
years.

“I will save my master,” he cried, his eyes blazing maniacally. “I will
save him yet!”

Father Brown could do nothing but gaze after the boat as it struggled
up-stream and pray that the old man might waken the little town in time.

“A duel is bad enough,” he muttered, rubbing up his rough dust-coloured
hair, “but there’s something wrong about this duel, even as a duel. I
feel it in my bones. But what can it be?”

As he stood staring at the water, a wavering mirror of sunset, he
heard from the other end of the island garden a small but unmistakable
sound--the cold concussion of steel. He turned his head.

Away on the farthest cape or headland of the long islet, on a strip of
turf beyond the last rank of roses, the duellists had already crossed
swords. Evening above them was a dome of virgin gold, and, distant as
they were, every detail was picked out. They had cast off their coats,
but the yellow waistcoat and white hair of Saradine, the red waistcoat
and white trousers of Antonelli, glittered in the level light like the
colours of the dancing clockwork dolls. The two swords sparkled from
point to pommel like two diamond pins. There was something frightful
in the two figures appearing so little and so gay. They looked like two
butterflies trying to pin each other to a cork.

Father Brown ran as hard as he could, his little legs going like a
wheel. But when he came to the field of combat he found he was born too
late and too early--too late to stop the strife, under the shadow of the
grim Sicilians leaning on their oars, and too early to anticipate any
disastrous issue of it. For the two men were singularly well matched,
the prince using his skill with a sort of cynical confidence, the
Sicilian using his with a murderous care. Few finer fencing matches can
ever have been seen in crowded amphitheatres than that which tinkled and
sparkled on that forgotten island in the reedy river. The dizzy fight
was balanced so long that hope began to revive in the protesting priest;
by all common probability Paul must soon come back with the police. It
would be some comfort even if Flambeau came back from his fishing, for
Flambeau, physically speaking, was worth four other men. But there was
no sign of Flambeau, and, what was much queerer, no sign of Paul or the
police. No other raft or stick was left to float on; in that lost
island in that vast nameless pool, they were cut off as on a rock in the
Pacific.

Almost as he had the thought the ringing of the rapiers quickened to a
rattle, the prince’s arms flew up, and the point shot out behind between
his shoulder-blades. He went over with a great whirling movement, almost
like one throwing the half of a boy’s cart-wheel. The sword flew from
his hand like a shooting star, and dived into the distant river. And
he himself sank with so earth-shaking a subsidence that he broke a
big rose-tree with his body and shook up into the sky a cloud of red
earth--like the smoke of some heathen sacrifice. The Sicilian had made
blood-offering to the ghost of his father.

The priest was instantly on his knees by the corpse; but only to make
too sure that it was a corpse. As he was still trying some last hopeless
tests he heard for the first time voices from farther up the river, and
saw a police boat shoot up to the landing-stage, with constables and
other important people, including the excited Paul. The little priest
rose with a distinctly dubious grimace.

“Now, why on earth,” he muttered, “why on earth couldn’t he have come
before?”

Some seven minutes later the island was occupied by an invasion
of townsfolk and police, and the latter had put their hands on the
victorious duellist, ritually reminding him that anything he said might
be used against him.

“I shall not say anything,” said the monomaniac, with a wonderful and
peaceful face. “I shall never say anything more. I am very happy, and I
only want to be hanged.”

Then he shut his mouth as they led him away, and it is the strange but
certain truth that he never opened it again in this world, except to say
“Guilty” at his trial.

Father Brown had stared at the suddenly crowded garden, the arrest of
the man of blood, the carrying away of the corpse after its examination
by the doctor, rather as one watches the break-up of some ugly dream; he
was motionless, like a man in a nightmare. He gave his name and address
as a witness, but declined their offer of a boat to the shore, and
remained alone in the island garden, gazing at the broken rose bush
and the whole green theatre of that swift and inexplicable tragedy. The
light died along the river; mist rose in the marshy banks; a few belated
birds flitted fitfully across.

Stuck stubbornly in his sub-consciousness (which was an unusually
lively one) was an unspeakable certainty that there was something still
unexplained. This sense that had clung to him all day could not be fully
explained by his fancy about “looking-glass land.” Somehow he had not
seen the real story, but some game or masque. And yet people do not get
hanged or run through the body for the sake of a charade.

As he sat on the steps of the landing-stage ruminating he grew conscious
of the tall, dark streak of a sail coming silently down the shining
river, and sprang to his feet with such a backrush of feeling that he
almost wept.

“Flambeau!” he cried, and shook his friend by both hands again and
again, much to the astonishment of that sportsman, as he came on shore
with his fishing tackle. “Flambeau,” he said, “so you’re not killed?”

“Killed!” repeated the angler in great astonishment. “And why should I
be killed?”

“Oh, because nearly everybody else is,” said his companion rather
wildly. “Saradine got murdered, and Antonelli wants to be hanged, and
his mother’s fainted, and I, for one, don’t know whether I’m in this
world or the next. But, thank God, you’re in the same one.” And he took
the bewildered Flambeau’s arm.

As they turned from the landing-stage they came under the eaves of the
low bamboo house, and looked in through one of the windows, as they
had done on their first arrival. They beheld a lamp-lit interior well
calculated to arrest their eyes. The table in the long dining-room
had been laid for dinner when Saradine’s destroyer had fallen like a
stormbolt on the island. And the dinner was now in placid progress, for
Mrs. Anthony sat somewhat sullenly at the foot of the table, while at
the head of it was Mr. Paul, the major domo, eating and drinking of the
best, his bleared, bluish eyes standing queerly out of his face, his
gaunt countenance inscrutable, but by no means devoid of satisfaction.

With a gesture of powerful impatience, Flambeau rattled at the window,
wrenched it open, and put an indignant head into the lamp-lit room.

“Well,” he cried. “I can understand you may need some refreshment,
but really to steal your master’s dinner while he lies murdered in the
garden--”

“I have stolen a great many things in a long and pleasant life,” replied
the strange old gentleman placidly; “this dinner is one of the few
things I have not stolen. This dinner and this house and garden happen
to belong to me.”

A thought flashed across Flambeau’s face. “You mean to say,” he began,
“that the will of Prince Saradine--”

“I am Prince Saradine,” said the old man, munching a salted almond.

Father Brown, who was looking at the birds outside, jumped as if he were
shot, and put in at the window a pale face like a turnip.

“You are what?” he repeated in a shrill voice.

“Paul, Prince Saradine, A vos ordres,” said the venerable person
politely, lifting a glass of sherry. “I live here very quietly, being
a domestic kind of fellow; and for the sake of modesty I am called Mr.
Paul, to distinguish me from my unfortunate brother Mr. Stephen. He
died, I hear, recently--in the garden. Of course, it is not my fault
if enemies pursue him to this place. It is owing to the regrettable
irregularity of his life. He was not a domestic character.”

He relapsed into silence, and continued to gaze at the opposite wall
just above the bowed and sombre head of the woman. They saw plainly
the family likeness that had haunted them in the dead man. Then his old
shoulders began to heave and shake a little, as if he were choking, but
his face did not alter.

“My God!” cried Flambeau after a pause, “he’s laughing!”

“Come away,” said Father Brown, who was quite white. “Come away from
this house of hell. Let us get into an honest boat again.”

Night had sunk on rushes and river by the time they had pushed off from
the island, and they went down-stream in the dark, warming themselves
with two big cigars that glowed like crimson ships’ lanterns. Father
Brown took his cigar out of his mouth and said:

“I suppose you can guess the whole story now? After all, it’s a
primitive story. A man had two enemies. He was a wise man. And so he
discovered that two enemies are better than one.”

“I do not follow that,” answered Flambeau.

“Oh, it’s really simple,” rejoined his friend. “Simple, though anything
but innocent. Both the Saradines were scamps, but the prince, the
elder, was the sort of scamp that gets to the top, and the younger, the
captain, was the sort that sinks to the bottom. This squalid officer
fell from beggar to blackmailer, and one ugly day he got his hold upon
his brother, the prince. Obviously it was for no light matter, for
Prince Paul Saradine was frankly ‘fast,’ and had no reputation to lose
as to the mere sins of society. In plain fact, it was a hanging matter,
and Stephen literally had a rope round his brother’s neck. He had
somehow discovered the truth about the Sicilian affair, and could prove
that Paul murdered old Antonelli in the mountains. The captain raked in
the hush money heavily for ten years, until even the prince’s splendid
fortune began to look a little foolish.

“But Prince Saradine bore another burden besides his blood-sucking
brother. He knew that the son of Antonelli, a mere child at the time of
the murder, had been trained in savage Sicilian loyalty, and lived only
to avenge his father, not with the gibbet (for he lacked Stephen’s legal
proof), but with the old weapons of vendetta. The boy had practised arms
with a deadly perfection, and about the time that he was old enough to
use them Prince Saradine began, as the society papers said, to travel.
The fact is that he began to flee for his life, passing from place
to place like a hunted criminal; but with one relentless man upon his
trail. That was Prince Paul’s position, and by no means a pretty one.
The more money he spent on eluding Antonelli the less he had to silence
Stephen. The more he gave to silence Stephen the less chance there was
of finally escaping Antonelli. Then it was that he showed himself a
great man--a genius like Napoleon.

“Instead of resisting his two antagonists, he surrendered suddenly to
both of them. He gave way like a Japanese wrestler, and his foes fell
prostrate before him. He gave up the race round the world, and he gave
up his address to young Antonelli; then he gave up everything to his
brother. He sent Stephen money enough for smart clothes and easy travel,
with a letter saying roughly: ‘This is all I have left. You have cleaned
me out. I still have a little house in Norfolk, with servants and a
cellar, and if you want more from me you must take that. Come and take
possession if you like, and I will live there quietly as your friend
or agent or anything.’ He knew that the Sicilian had never seen the
Saradine brothers save, perhaps, in pictures; he knew they were somewhat
alike, both having grey, pointed beards. Then he shaved his own face
and waited. The trap worked. The unhappy captain, in his new clothes,
entered the house in triumph as a prince, and walked upon the Sicilian’s
sword.

“There was one hitch, and it is to the honour of human nature. Evil
spirits like Saradine often blunder by never expecting the virtues of
mankind. He took it for granted that the Italian’s blow, when it came,
would be dark, violent and nameless, like the blow it avenged; that the
victim would be knifed at night, or shot from behind a hedge, and so
die without speech. It was a bad minute for Prince Paul when Antonelli’s
chivalry proposed a formal duel, with all its possible explanations. It
was then that I found him putting off in his boat with wild eyes. He was
fleeing, bareheaded, in an open boat before Antonelli should learn who
he was.

“But, however agitated, he was not hopeless. He knew the adventurer and
he knew the fanatic. It was quite probable that Stephen, the adventurer,
would hold his tongue, through his mere histrionic pleasure in playing a
part, his lust for clinging to his new cosy quarters, his rascal’s
trust in luck, and his fine fencing. It was certain that Antonelli, the
fanatic, would hold his tongue, and be hanged without telling tales
of his family. Paul hung about on the river till he knew the fight
was over. Then he roused the town, brought the police, saw his two
vanquished enemies taken away forever, and sat down smiling to his
dinner.”

“Laughing, God help us!” said Flambeau with a strong shudder. “Do they
get such ideas from Satan?”

“He got that idea from you,” answered the priest.

“God forbid!” ejaculated Flambeau. “From me! What do you mean!”

The priest pulled a visiting-card from his pocket and held it up in the
faint glow of his cigar; it was scrawled with green ink.

“Don’t you remember his original invitation to you?” he asked, “and the
compliment to your criminal exploit? ‘That trick of yours,’ he says,
‘of getting one detective to arrest the other’? He has just copied your
trick. With an enemy on each side of him, he slipped swiftly out of the
way and let them collide and kill each other.”

Flambeau tore Prince Saradine’s card from the priest’s hands and rent it
savagely in small pieces.

“There’s the last of that old skull and crossbones,” he said as he
scattered the pieces upon the dark and disappearing waves of the stream;
“but I should think it would poison the fishes.”

The last gleam of white card and green ink was drowned and darkened;
a faint and vibrant colour as of morning changed the sky, and the moon
behind the grasses grew paler. They drifted in silence.

“Father,” said Flambeau suddenly, “do you think it was all a dream?”

The priest shook his head, whether in dissent or agnosticism, but
remained mute. A smell of hawthorn and of orchards came to them through
the darkness, telling them that a wind was awake; the next moment it
swayed their little boat and swelled their sail, and carried them onward
down the winding river to happier places and the homes of harmless men.